worldcup-2018/index.adoc, before:

= World Cup Sandbox

:img: https://guides.neo4j.com/sandbox/3.4/img

== Welcome to the World Cup Sandbox

It's World Cup 2018 and we've created a special sandbox for you to play around with while you follow the tournament.

== Schema

We've imported all the matches, squads, lineups, and scorers from all the World Cups between 1930 and 2014.
Let's take a look at the schema.

Run the following query:

[source,cypher]
----
CALL db.schema()
----

== Who hosted the World Cup?

We'll start with a basic query to find out which countries have hosted World Cups:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (wc:WorldCup)-[:HOSTED_BY]->(country)
RETURN wc.name, wc.year, country.name
ORDER BY wc.year
----

Most World Cups had a single host country, but we can see that in 2002 there were a couple of hosts.
What if we want to still have a single row per World Cup?

== Who hosted the World Cup?

We can use the `collect` function to return the host countries as an array.
Run the following query to return one World Cup per row:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (wc:WorldCup)-[:HOSTED_BY]->(country)
RETURN wc.name, wc.year, collect(country.name) AS countries
ORDER BY wc.year
----

== Has anyone ever hosted the World Cup more than once?

Has any country ever hosted the World Cup more than once?
Run the following query to find out:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (host:Country)<-[:HOSTED_BY]-(wc)
WITH wc, host ORDER BY wc.year
WITH host, count(*) AS times, collect(wc.year) AS years
WHERE times > 1
return host.name, times, years
----

== Have the hosts ever won the World Cup?

It's been a long time since the hosts last won the World Cup.
Can you remember when it last happened?

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (match:Match {round: "Final"})<-[hostPlayed:PLAYED_IN]-(host:Country),
      (host)<-[:HOSTED_BY]-(worldCup),
      (worldCup)-[:CONTAINS_MATCH]->(match),
      (match)<-[oppositionPlayed:PLAYED_IN]-(opposition)
WHERE (hostPlayed.score > oppositionPlayed.score) OR (hostPlayed.penalties > oppositionPlayed.score)
RETURN host.name, worldCup.name, hostPlayed.score + "-" + oppositionPlayed.score AS score
----

== Who were the finalists in each World Cup?

If we want to find the finalists in each World Cup we can write the following query:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (match:Match {round: "Final"})<-[hostPlayed:PLAYED_IN]-(team1:Country),
      (worldCup)-[:CONTAINS_MATCH]->(match),
      (match)<-[oppositionPlayed:PLAYED_IN]-(team2)
WHERE id(team1) < id(team2)
RETURN match.date, team1.name, team2.name, worldCup.name,
       hostPlayed.score + "-" + oppositionPlayed.score +
       CASE WHEN not hostPlayed.penalties is null
       THEN " (" + hostPlayed.penalties + "-" + oppositionPlayed.penalties + ")"
       ELSE "" END
       AS score
ORDER BY match.date
----

== Who's the top scorer across all World Cups?

One of the most commonly mentioned statistics by football commentators is the top scorer across all World Cups.
We can run the following query to find the answer:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (player)-->(stats)-[:SCORED_GOAL]->(goal),
      (stats)-[:IN_MATCH]->()<-[:CONTAINS_MATCH]-(wc:WorldCup)
WHERE goal.type IN ["goal", "penalty"]
WITH  player.name AS player, count(*) AS goals, collect(DISTINCT wc.year) AS competitions
UNWIND competitions AS competition
WITH player, goals, competition ORDER BY player, goals, competition
RETURN player, goals, collect(competition) AS competitions
ORDER BY goals DESC
LIMIT 20
----

It'll be interesting to see if any of the players in Russia can close the gap to those at the top.

== Multiple World Cups?

How many players have been named in 3 or more World Cup squads?
Have a guess before you run the next query:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (wc)<-[:FOR_WORLD_CUP]-(squad)<-[:IN_SQUAD]-(player), (country)-[:NAMED_SQUAD]->(squad)
WITH player, collect(wc.year) AS wcs, collect(distinct country.name) AS countries, COUNT(*) AS times
WHERE times > 3

UNWIND wcs AS wc
WITH player, countries, wc, times
ORDER BY times DESC, wc

RETURN player.name, times, collect(wc), countries
ORDER BY times DESC;
----

== Goalscoring substitutes

Some players never get a start but have a big impact when they come off the bench.
The following query returns goal scoring substitutes:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (country:Country)-[:NAMED_SQUAD]-(squad:Squad)<-[:IN_SQUAD]-(player:Player),
      (player)-[:SUBSTITUTE]->(app:Appearance),
      (app)-[:IN_MATCH]->(match:Match), (squad)-[:FOR_WORLD_CUP]->(wc:WorldCup),
      (wc)-[:CONTAINS_MATCH]->(match)
MATCH (app)-[:SCORED_GOAL]->(goal:Goal)
RETURN player.name, count(goal) AS goals
ORDER BY goals DESC
LIMIT 10
----


== Top scorer by country

Do you know who your country's top World Cup scorer is?

[source, cypher]
----
match (c:Country)-[:NAMED_SQUAD]->(s:Squad)--(player:Player)-->()-[:SCORED_GOAL]->(g)
WITH c, player, count(distinct g) AS goals
WITH c, collect({player:player.name, count: goals}) AS playersGoals

UNWIND playersGoals as playerGoals

WITH c, playerGoals
ORDER BY c.name, playerGoals.count DESC

WITH c, COLLECT(playerGoals)[0] AS topScorer
RETURN c.name, topScorer.player, topScorer.count
ORDER BY topScorer.count DESC
----

Commit message:

add top scorers playing this year

worldcup-2018/index.adoc, after:

= World Cup Sandbox

:img: https://guides.neo4j.com/sandbox/3.4/img

== Welcome to the World Cup Sandbox

It's World Cup 2018 and we've created a special sandbox for you to play around with while you follow the tournament.

== Schema

We've imported all the matches, squads, lineups, and scorers from all the World Cups between 1930 and 2014.
Let's take a look at the schema.

Run the following query:

[source,cypher]
----
CALL db.schema()
----

== Who hosted the World Cup?

We'll start with a basic query to find out which countries have hosted World Cups:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (wc:WorldCup)-[:HOSTED_BY]->(country)
RETURN wc.name, wc.year, country.name
ORDER BY wc.year
----

Most World Cups had a single host country, but we can see that in 2002 there were a couple of hosts.
What if we want to still have a single row per World Cup?

== Who hosted the World Cup?

We can use the `collect` function to return the host countries as an array.
Run the following query to return one World Cup per row:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (wc:WorldCup)-[:HOSTED_BY]->(country)
RETURN wc.name, wc.year, collect(country.name) AS countries
ORDER BY wc.year
----

== Has anyone ever hosted the World Cup more than once?

Has any country ever hosted the World Cup more than once?
Run the following query to find out:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (host:Country)<-[:HOSTED_BY]-(wc)
WITH wc, host ORDER BY wc.year
WITH host, count(*) AS times, collect(wc.year) AS years
WHERE times > 1
return host.name, times, years
----

== Have the hosts ever won the World Cup?

It's been a long time since the hosts last won the World Cup.
Can you remember when it last happened?

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (match:Match {round: "Final"})<-[hostPlayed:PLAYED_IN]-(host:Country),
      (host)<-[:HOSTED_BY]-(worldCup),
      (worldCup)-[:CONTAINS_MATCH]->(match),
      (match)<-[oppositionPlayed:PLAYED_IN]-(opposition)
WHERE (hostPlayed.score > oppositionPlayed.score) OR (hostPlayed.penalties > oppositionPlayed.score)
RETURN host.name, worldCup.name, hostPlayed.score + "-" + oppositionPlayed.score AS score
----

== Who were the finalists in each World Cup?

If we want to find the finalists in each World Cup we can write the following query:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (match:Match {round: "Final"})<-[hostPlayed:PLAYED_IN]-(team1:Country),
      (worldCup)-[:CONTAINS_MATCH]->(match),
      (match)<-[oppositionPlayed:PLAYED_IN]-(team2)
WHERE id(team1) < id(team2)
RETURN match.date, team1.name, team2.name, worldCup.name,
       hostPlayed.score + "-" + oppositionPlayed.score +
       CASE WHEN not hostPlayed.penalties is null
       THEN " (" + hostPlayed.penalties + "-" + oppositionPlayed.penalties + ")"
       ELSE "" END
       AS score
ORDER BY match.date
----

== Who's the top scorer across all World Cups?

One of the most commonly mentioned statistics by football commentators is the top scorer across all World Cups.
We can run the following query to find the answer:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (player)-->(stats)-[:SCORED_GOAL]->(goal),
      (stats)-[:IN_MATCH]->()<-[:CONTAINS_MATCH]-(wc:WorldCup)
WHERE goal.type IN ["goal", "penalty"]
WITH  player.name AS player, count(*) AS goals, collect(DISTINCT wc.year) AS competitions
UNWIND competitions AS competition
WITH player, goals, competition ORDER BY player, goals, competition
RETURN player, goals, collect(competition) AS competitions
ORDER BY goals DESC
LIMIT 20
----

It'll be interesting to see if any of the players in Russia can close the gap to those at the top.

== Which top scorers are playing in 2018?

Who are the top scoring players participating in this year's World Cup?

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (player:Player)-->(stats)-[:SCORED_GOAL]->(goal),
      (stats)-[:IN_MATCH]->()<-[:CONTAINS_MATCH]-(wc:WorldCup)
WHERE goal.type IN ["goal", "penalty"]
WITH  player, count(*) AS goals
ORDER BY goals DESC
MATCH (player)-[:IN_SQUAD]->(squad:Squad {year: 2018})
RETURN player.name, goals
LIMIT 10
----

== Multiple World Cups?

How many players have been named in 3 or more World Cup squads?
Have a guess before you run the next query:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (wc)<-[:FOR_WORLD_CUP]-(squad)<-[:IN_SQUAD]-(player), (country)-[:NAMED_SQUAD]->(squad)
WITH player, collect(wc.year) AS wcs, collect(distinct country.name) AS countries, COUNT(*) AS times
WHERE times > 3

UNWIND wcs AS wc
WITH player, countries, wc, times
ORDER BY times DESC, wc

RETURN player.name, times, collect(wc), countries
ORDER BY times DESC;
----

== Goalscoring substitutes

Some players never get a start but have a big impact when they come off the bench.
The following query returns goal scoring substitutes:

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (country:Country)-[:NAMED_SQUAD]-(squad:Squad)<-[:IN_SQUAD]-(player:Player),
      (player)-[:SUBSTITUTE]->(app:Appearance),
      (app)-[:IN_MATCH]->(match:Match), (squad)-[:FOR_WORLD_CUP]->(wc:WorldCup),
      (wc)-[:CONTAINS_MATCH]->(match)
MATCH (app)-[:SCORED_GOAL]->(goal:Goal)
RETURN player.name, count(goal) AS goals
ORDER BY goals DESC
LIMIT 10
----


== Top scorer by country

Do you know who your country's top World Cup scorer is?

[source, cypher]
----
match (c:Country)-[:NAMED_SQUAD]->(s:Squad)--(player:Player)-->()-[:SCORED_GOAL]->(g)
WITH c, player, count(distinct g) AS goals
WITH c, collect({player:player.name, count: goals}) AS playersGoals

UNWIND playersGoals as playerGoals

WITH c, playerGoals
ORDER BY c.name, playerGoals.count DESC

WITH c, COLLECT(playerGoals)[0] AS topScorer
RETURN c.name, topScorer.player, topScorer.count
ORDER BY topScorer.count DESC
----
